Restructuring Expressions (#697)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/values-and-types/type-predicate.adoc

[[type-predicate-syntax]]
== Syntax

[source, syntax]
----
<expr> IS :: <TYPE>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is a Cypher type.
For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].

[[type-predicate-regular]]
== Verify the type of a Cypher expression

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| val | isInteger
| 42 | true
| true | false
| 'abc' | false
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-not]]
== Type predicate expressions with NOT

It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression is not of a certain type, using the negated type predicate expression `IS NOT ::`.

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS NOT :: STRING AS notString
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| val | notString
| 42 | true
| true | true
| 'abc' | false
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-null]]
== Type predicate expressions for null

> As of Neo4j 5.10, a Cypher type includes the `null` value unless it is explicitly appended with `NOT NULL`.

Reviewer: Actually, in 5.9 it also included the null value, what is new is the ability to remove it using that syntax

----
CREATE (:Person {name: 'Alice', age:18}),
(:Person {name:'Bob', age:'20'}),
(:Person {name:'Charlie', age:21}),
----
////

image::type_predicate_expression_graph.svg[]

The following query finds all `Person` nodes with an `age` property that is an `INTEGER` with a greater value than `18`.

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person)
WHERE n.age IS :: INTEGER AND n.age > 18
RETURN n.name AS name, n.age AS age
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | age
| Charlie | 21
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

The type `PROPERTY VALUE` can also be used to check whether a type is storable as a property.
Types not storable in properties, such as `MAP`, will return `false` when checked with `IS :: PROPERTY VALUE`.

[[type-predicate-numbers]]
== Type predicate expressions for numbers of different sizes

For numerical values passed in as parameters, Cypher does not take the size of the number into account.
Cypher will therefore regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER` regardless of its declared size.
For example, an `INT16` or an `INT32` passed through from a client programming language will both be treated by Cypher as an `INTEGER`.

> Note that any exact numerical parameter used must fit within the range of an `INT 64`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that any exact numerical parameter used must fit within the range of an `INT64`. 
```

A type predicate expression can be used to verify the type of a variable, literal, property or other Cypher expression.

[[type-predicate-syntax]]
== Syntax

[source, syntax]
----
<expr> IS :: <TYPE>
----

Where `<expr>` is any Cypher expression and `<TYPE>` is a Cypher type.
For all available Cypher types, see the section on xref::values-and-types/property-structural-constructed.adoc#types-synonyms[types and their synonyms].

[[type-predicate-regular]]
== Verify the type of a Cypher expression

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS :: INTEGER AS isInteger
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| val | isInteger
| 42 | true
| true | false
| 'abc' | false
2+d|Rows: 3
|===

[[type-predicate-not]]
== Type predicate expressions with NOT

It is also possible to verify that a Cypher expression is not of a certain type, using the negated type predicate expression `IS NOT ::`.

[source, cypher]
----
UNWIND [42, true, 'abc'] AS val
RETURN val, val IS NOT :: STRING AS notString
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| val | notString
| 42 | true
| true | true
| 'abc' | false
2+d|Rows: 3

> |===

Reviewer 2: Can we add `null` to the list of values to be tested in both examples? I think it's helpful for people to see its return values.

[[type-predicate-null]]
== Type predicate expressions for null

Cypher types includes the `null` value.
Since Neo4j 5.10, type predicate expressions can be appended with `NOT NULL`.
This means that `IS ::` returns `true` for all expressions evaluating to `null`, unless `NOT NULL` is appended.

[source, cypher]
----
WITH toFloat(null) AS nullValue
RETURN nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean, nullValue IS :: BOOLEAN NOT NULL AS isNotNullBoolean

> ----

Reviewer 2: What am I missing here if I think of this query as being equivalent to
```
RETURN 
    null IS :: BOOLEAN AS isBoolean, 
    null IS :: BOOLEAN NOT NULL AS isNotNullBoolean
```
? @gem-neo4j 

If that's the case, can we simplify all examples following this one?

Reviewer: I remember this was to make a point of showing null not as a literal (taken from a previous examples because there was text saying: "all expressions evaluating to `null`" so this showed an expression evaluating to null and not just the literal). But I agree in this case the rewrite is cleaner :) so feel free to change

|===
| isNull
| true
1+d|Rows: 1
|===

Closed dynamic union types (`INNER_TYPE_1 | INNER_TYPE_2...`) cannot be declared as `NOT NULL`. Instead, all the inner types should be individually declared as not nullable to achieve this behavior.

Note that all inner types in a closed dynamic union must be either nullable, or not nullable. This is because `null` values cannot be attributed to a specific type. A syntax error will be raised if the inner types are not of the same nullability.

[source, cypher, role=test-fail]
----
RETURN 1 IS :: INTEGER NOT NULL | FLOAT
----

.Error message
[source, output]
----
All types in a Closed Dynamic Union must be nullable, or be appended with `NOT NULL`.
----

[[type-predicate-properties]]
== Type predicate expression for properties

Type predicate expressions can also be used to filter out nodes or relationships with properties of a certain type.

A graph containing the following nodes is used for the example below:

////
[source, cypher, role=test-setup]
----
CREATE (:Person {name: 'Alice', age:18}),
(:Person {name:'Bob', age:'20'}),
(:Person {name:'Charlie', age:21}),
----
////

image::type_predicate_expression_graph.svg[]

> The following query finds all `Person` nodes with an `age` property that is an `INTEGER` with a greater value than `18`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following query finds all `Person` nodes with an `age` property that is an `INTEGER` with a value greater than `18`.
```

[source, cypher]
----
MATCH (n:Person)
WHERE n.age IS :: INTEGER AND n.age > 18
RETURN n.name AS name, n.age AS age
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| name | age
| Charlie | 21
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

The type `PROPERTY VALUE` can also be used to check whether a type is storable as a property.
Types not storable in properties, such as `MAP`, will return `false` when checked with `IS :: PROPERTY VALUE`.

[[type-predicate-numbers]]
== Type predicate expressions for numbers of different sizes

For numerical values passed in as parameters, Cypher does not take the size of the number into account.
Cypher will therefore regard any exact numerical parameter as an `INTEGER` regardless of its declared size.

> For example, an `INT16` or an `INT32` passed through from a client programming language will both be treated by Cypher as an `INTEGER`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, an `INT16` or an `INT32` passed through from a link:https://neo4j.com/docs/create-applications/{language library} will both be treated by Cypher as an `INTEGER`.
```

== Syntactical variations of type predicate expressions

Type predicate expressions allow for some alternative syntax:

[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
<expr> IS TYPED <TYPE>
----

[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
<expr> :: <TYPE>
----

For verifying that an expression is not of a certain type, the following alternative syntax is supported:

[source, syntax, role="noheader", indent=0]
----
<expr> IS NOT TYPED <TYPE>
----

[[type-predicate-any-and-nothing]]
== Use of `ANY` and `NOTHING` types

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.10._

`ANY` is a supertype which matches values of all types.
`NOTHING` is a type containing an empty set of values.
This means that it returns `false` for all values.

[source, cypher]
----
RETURN 42 IS :: ANY AS isOfTypeAny, 42 IS :: NOTHING AS isOfTypeNothing
----

[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| isOfTypeAny | isOfTypeNothing
| true        | false
2+d|Rows: 1
|===

[[type-predicate-closed-dynamic-unions]]
== Closed Dynamic Unions

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.11._

Closed dynamic union types allow for the testing of multiple types in the same predicate.

> For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I don't think we need this. We don't have it in any other section.
